---
layout: post
title: 'An overview of topic models: beyond Latent Dirichlet Allocation'
date: '2015-08-08 15:29:12'
---

In 2003, David Blei, Andrew Ng, and Michael Jordan ... the world with latent Dirichlet allocation. Since then, it has spawned an entire field of topic models.

Explain each of these in terms of their publication date.

## Latent Dirichlet Allocation
_Latent Dirichlet allocation_ (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003)

## Latent topic structure and Bayesian nonparametrics
### Correlated topic models
The _correlated topic model_ (CTM) (Blei and Lafferty, 2006)}}

### Hierarchical Dirichlet Process
A _hierarchical Dirichlet process_ (HDP)

### Nested Chinese Restaurant Process
A _nested Chinese restaurant process_ (nCRP)

### Nested Hierarchical Dirichlet Process
A _nested Hierarchical Dirichlet process_ (nHDP)

### Markov Mixed Membership model
A _Markov mixed membership model_ (Markov M3)

## Supervised topic models

## Dynamic topic models

There are too many to cover here. Perhaps in additional blog posts then, and just focus here on the Bayesian nonparametric side of things?

## Concluding remarks

Topic models are only the tip of the iceberg. They are organizational tools. They are ... They are a primitive task that interfaces with more of the primary tasks that we as humans are interested in knowing. Before we can get to those, we must master topic models.

## References
* David M. Blei and John Lafferty. Correlated topic models. _Neural Information Processing Systems_, 2006.
* David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. Latent Dirichlet Allocation. _Journal of Machine Learning Research_, 3, 993–1022, 2015.